The Tomb
(1917)
In relating the circumstances which have led to my confinement within this refuge for the 
demented, I am aware that my present position will create a natural doubt of the authenticity 
of my narrative. It is an unfortunate fact that the bulk of humanity is too limited in its mental 
vision to weigh with patience and intelligence those isolated phenomena, seen and felt only 
by a psychologically sensitive few, which lie outside its common experience. Men of broader 
intellect know that there is no sharp distinction betwixt the real and the unreal; that all things 
appear as they do only by virtue of the delicate individual physical and mental media through 
which we are made conscious of them; but the prosaic materialism of the majority condemns 
as madness the flashes of super-sight which penetrate the common veil of obvious 
empiricism.
My name is Jervas Dudley, and from earliest childhood I have been a dreamer and a 
visionary. Wealthy beyond the necessity of a commercial life, and temperamentally unfitted for 
the formal studies and social recreations of my acquaintances, I have dwelt ever in realms 
apart from the visible world; spending my youth and adolescence in ancient and little-known 
books, and in roaming the fields and groves of the region near my ancestral home. I do not 
think that what I read in these books or saw in these fields and groves was exactly what other 
boys read and saw there; but of this I must say little, since detailed speech would but confirm 
those cruel slanders upon my intellect which I sometimes overhear from the whispers of the 
stealthy attendants around me. It is sufficient for me to relate events without analysing 
causes.
I have said that I dwelt apart from the visible world, but I have not said that I dwelt alone. This 
no human creature may do; for lacking the fellowship of the living, he inevitably draws upon 
the companionship of things that are not, or are no longer, living. Close by my home there lies 
a singular wooded hollow, in whose twilight deeps I spent most of my time; reading, thinking, 
and dreaming. Down its moss-covered slopes my first steps of infancy were taken, and 
around its grotesquely gnarled oak trees my first fancies of boyhood were woven. Well did I 
come to know the presiding dryads of those trees, and often have I watched their wild dances 
in the struggling beams of a waning moon—but of these things I must not now speak. I will tell 
only of the lone tomb in the darkest of the hillside thickets; the deserted tomb of the Hydes, an 
old and exalted family whose last direct descendant had been laid within its black recesses 
many decades before my birth.
The vault to which I refer is of ancient granite, weathered and discoloured by the mists and 
dampness of generations. Excavated back into the hillside, the structure is visible only at the 
entrance. The door, a ponderous and forbidding slab of stone, hangs upon rusted iron hinges, 
and is fastened ajar in a queerly sinister way by means of heavy iron chains and padlocks, 
according to a gruesome fashion of half a century ago. The abode of the race whose scions 
are here inurned had once crowned the declivity which holds the tomb, but had long since 
fallen victim to the flames which sprang up from a disastrous stroke of lightning. Of the 
midnight storm which destroyed this gloomy mansion, the older inhabitants of the region 
sometimes speak in hushed and uneasy voices; alluding to what they call ―divine wrath in a 
manner that in later years vaguely increased the always strong fascination which I felt for the 
forest-darkened sepulchre. One man only had perished in the fire. When the last of the Hydes 
was buried in this place of shade and stillness, the sad urnful of ashes had come from a 
distant land; to which the family had repaired when the mansion burned down. No one 
remains to lay flowers before the granite portal, and few care to brave the depressing 
shadows which seem to linger strangely about the water-worn stones.
I shall never forget the afternoon when first I stumbled upon the half-hidden house of death. It 
was in mid-summer, when the alchemy of Nature transmutes the sylvan landscape to one 
vivid and almost homogeneous mass of green; when the senses are well-nigh intoxicated with 
the surging seas of moist verdure and the subtly indefinable odours of the soil and the 
vegetation. In such surroundings the mind loses its perspective; time and space become 
trivial and unreal, and echoes of a forgotten prehistoric past beat insistently upon the 
enthralled consciousness. All day I had been wandering through the mystic groves of the 
hollow; thinking thoughts I need not discuss, and conversing with things I need not name. In 
years a child of ten, I had seen and heard many wonders unknown to the throng; and was 
oddly aged in certain respects. When, upon forcing my way between two savage clumps of 
briers, I suddenly encountered the entrance of the vault, I had no knowledge of what I had 
discovered. The dark blocks of granite, the door so curiously ajar, and the funereal carvings 
above the arch, aroused in me no associations of mournful or terrible character. Of graves 
and tombs I knew and imagined much, but had on account of my peculiar temperament been 
kept from all personal contact with churchyards and cemeteries. The strange stone house on 
the woodland slope was to me only a source of interest and speculation; and its cold, damp 
interior, into which I vainly peered through the aperture so tantalisingly left, contained for me 
no hint of death or decay. But in that instant of curiosity was born the madly unreasoning 
desire which has brought me to this hell of confinement. Spurred on by a voice which must 
have come from the hideous soul of the forest, I resolved to enter the beckoning gloom in 
spite of the ponderous chains which barred my passage. In the waning light of day I 
alternately rattled the rusty impediments with a view to throwing wide the stone door, and 
essayed to squeeze my slight form through the space already provided; but neither plan met 
with success. At first curious, I was now frantic; and when in the thickening twilight I returned 
to my home, I had sworn to the hundred gods of the grove that at any cost I would some day 
force an entrance to the black, chilly depths that seemed calling out to me. The physician with 
the iron-grey beard who comes each day to my room once told a visitor that this decision 
marked the beginning of a pitiful monomania; but I will leave final judgment to my readers 
when they shall have learnt all.
The months following my discovery were spent in futile attempts to force the complicated 
padlock of the slightly open vault, and in carefully guarded inquiries regarding the nature and 
history of the structure. With the traditionally receptive ears of the small boy, I learned much; 
though an habitual secretiveness caused me to tell no one of my information or my resolve. It 
is perhaps worth mentioning that I was not at all surprised or terrified on learning of the nature 
of the vault. My rather original ideas regarding life and death had caused me to associate the 
cold clay with the breathing body in a vague fashion; and I felt that the great and sinister 
family of the burned-down mansion was in some way represented within the stone space I 
sought to explore. Mumbled tales of the weird rites and godless revels of bygone years in the 
ancient hall gave to me a new and potent interest in the tomb, before whose door I would sit 
for hours at a time each day. Once I thrust a candle within the nearly closed entrance, but 
could see nothing save a flight of damp stone steps leading downward. The odour of the 
place repelled yet bewitched me. I felt I had known it before, in a past remote beyond all 
recollection; beyond even my tenancy of the body I now possess.
The year after I first beheld the tomb, I stumbled upon a worm-eaten translation of Plutarch‘s 
Lives in the book-filled attic of my home. Reading the life of Theseus, I was much impressed 
by that passage telling of the great stone beneath which the boyish hero was to find his 
tokens of destiny whenever he should become old enough to lift its enormous weight. This 
legend had the effect of dispelling my keenest impatience to enter the vault, for it made me 
feel that the time was not yet ripe. Later, I told myself, I should grow to a strength and 
ingenuity which might enable me to unfasten the heavily chained door with ease; but until 
then I would do better by conforming to what seemed the will of Fate.
Accordingly my watches by the dank portal became less persistent, and much of my time was 
spent in other though equally strange pursuits. I would sometimes rise very quietly in the 
night, stealing out to walk in those churchyards and places of burial from which I had been 
kept by my parents. What I did there I may not say, for I am not now sure of the reality of 
certain things; but I know that on the day after such a nocturnal ramble I would often astonish 
those about me with my knowledge of topics almost forgotten for many generations. It was 
after a night like this that I shocked the community with a queer conceit about the burial of the 
rich and celebrated Squire Brewster, a maker of local history who was interred in 1711, and 
whose slate headstone, bearing a graven skull and crossbones, was slowly crumbling to 
powder. In a moment of childish imagination I vowed not only that the undertaker, Goodman 
Simpson, had stolen the silver-buckled shoes, silken hose, and satin small-clothes of the 
deceased before burial; but that the Squire himself, not fully inanimate, had turned twice in his 
mound-covered coffin on the day after interment.
But the idea of entering the tomb never left my thoughts; being indeed stimulated by the 
unexpected genealogical discovery that my own maternal ancestry possessed at least a slight 
link with the supposedly extinct family of the Hydes. Last of my paternal race, I was likewise 
the last of this older and more mysterious line. I began to feel that the tomb was mine, and to 
look forward with hot eagerness to the time when I might pass within that stone door and 
down those slimy stone steps in the dark. I now formed the habit of listening very intently at 
the slightly open portal, choosing my favourite hours of midnight stillness for the odd vigil. By 
the time I came of age, I had made a small clearing in the thicket before the mould-stained 
facade of the hillside, allowing the surrounding vegetation to encircle and overhang the space 
like the walls and roof of a sylvan bower. This bower was my temple, the fastened door my 
shrine, and here I would lie outstretched on the mossy ground, thinking strange thoughts and 
dreaming strange dreams.
The night of the first revelation was a sultry one. I must have fallen asleep from fatigue, for it 
was with a distinct sense of awakening that I heard the voices. Of those tones and accents I 
hesitate to speak; of their quality I will not speak; but I may say that they presented certain 
uncanny differences in vocabulary, pronunciation, and mode of utterance. Every shade of 
New England dialect, from the uncouth syllables of the Puritan colonists to the precise rhetoric 
of fifty years ago, seemed represented in that shadowy colloquy, though it was only later that I 
noticed the fact. At the time, indeed, my attention was distracted from this matter by another 
phenomenon; a phenomenon so fleeting that I could not take oath upon its reality. I barely 
fancied that as I awoke, a light had been hurriedly extinguished within the sunken sepulchre. I 
do not think I was either astounded or panic-stricken, but I know that I was greatly and 
permanently changed that night. Upon returning home I went with much directness to a rotting 
chest in the attic, wherein I found the key which next day unlocked with ease the barrier I had 
so long stormed in vain.
It was in the soft glow of late afternoon that I first entered the vault on the abandoned slope. A 
spell was upon me, and my heart leaped with an exultation I can but ill describe. As I closed 
the door behind me and descended the dripping steps by the light of my lone candle, I 
seemed to know the way; and though the candle sputtered with the stifling reek of the place, I 
felt singularly at home in the musty, charnel-house air. Looking about me, I beheld many 
marble slabs bearing coffins, or the remains of coffins. Some of these were sealed and intact, 
but others had nearly vanished, leaving the silver handles and plates isolated amidst certain 
curious heaps of whitish dust. Upon one plate I read the name of Sir Geoffrey Hyde, who had 
come from Sussex in 1640 and died here a few years later. In a conspicuous alcove was one 
fairly well-preserved and untenanted casket, adorned with a single name which brought to me 
both a smile and a shudder. An odd impulse caused me to climb upon the broad slab, 
extinguish my candle, and lie down within the vacant box.
In the grey light of dawn I staggered from the vault and locked the chain of the door behind 
me. I was no longer a young man, though but twenty-one winters had chilled my bodily frame. 
Early-rising villagers who observed my homeward progress looked at me strangely, and 
marvelled at the signs of ribald revelry which they saw in one whose life was known to be 
sober and solitary. I did not appear before my parents till after a long and refreshing sleep.
Henceforward I haunted the tomb each night; seeing, hearing, and doing things I must never 
reveal. My speech, always susceptible to environmental influences, was the first thing to 
succumb to the change; and my suddenly acquired archaism of diction was soon remarked 
upon. Later a queer boldness and recklessness came into my demeanour, till I unconsciously 
grew to possess the bearing of a man of the world despite my lifelong seclusion. My formerly 
silent tongue waxed voluble with the easy grace of a Chesterfield or the godless cynicism of a 
Rochester. I displayed a peculiar erudition utterly unlike the fantastic, monkish lore over which 
I had pored in youth; and covered the flyleaves of my books with facile impromptu epigrams 
which brought up suggestions of Gay, Prior, and the sprightliest of the Augustan wits and 
rimesters. One morning at breakfast I came close to disaster by declaiming in palpably 
liquorish accents an effusion of eighteenth-century Bacchanalian mirth; a bit of Georgian 
playfulness never recorded in a book, which ran something like this:
Come hither, my lads, with your tankards of ale,
And drink to the present before it shall fail;
Pile each on your platter a mountain of beef,
For ‘tis eating and drinking that bring us relief:
So fill up your glass,
For life will soon pass;
When you‘re dead ye‘ll ne‘er drink to your king or your lass!
Anacreon had a red nose, so they say;
But what‘s a red nose if ye‘re happy and gay?
Gad split me! I‘d rather be red whilst I‘m here,
Than white as a lily—and dead half a year!
So Betty, my miss,
Come give me a kiss;
In hell there‘s no innkeeper‘s daughter like this!
Young Harry, propp‘d up just as straight as he‘s able,
Will soon lose his wig and slip under the table;
But fill up your goblets and pass ‘em around—
Better under the table than under the ground!
So revel and chaff
As ye thirstily quaff:
Under six feet of dirt ‘tis less easy to laugh!
The fiend strike me blue! I‘m scarce able to walk,
And damn me if I can stand upright or talk!
Here, landlord, bid Betty to summon a chair;
I‘ll try home for a while, for my wife is not there!
So lend me a hand;
I‘m not able to stand,
But I‘m gay whilst I linger on top of the land!
About this time I conceived my present fear of fire and thunderstorms. Previously indifferent to 
such things, I had now an unspeakable horror of them; and would retire to the innermost 
recesses of the house whenever the heavens threatened an electrical display. A favourite 
haunt of mine during the day was the ruined cellar of the mansion that had burned down, and 
in fancy I would picture the structure as it had been in its prime. On one occasion I startled a 
villager by leading him confidently to a shallow sub-cellar, of whose existence I seemed to 
know in spite of the fact that it had been unseen and forgotten for many generations.
At last came that which I had long feared. My parents, alarmed at the altered manner and 
appearance of their only son, commenced to exert over my movements a kindly espionage 
which threatened to result in disaster. I had told no one of my visits to the tomb, having 
guarded my secret purpose with religious zeal since childhood; but now I was forced to 
exercise care in threading the mazes of the wooded hollow, that I might throw off a possible 
pursuer. My key to the vault I kept suspended from a cord about my neck, its presence known 
only to me. I never carried out of the sepulchre any of the things I came upon whilst within its 
walls.
One morning as I emerged from the damp tomb and fastened the chain of the portal with 
none too steady hand, I beheld in an adjacent thicket the dreaded face of a watcher. Surely 
the end was near; for my bower was discovered, and the objective of my nocturnal journeys 
revealed. The man did not accost me, so I hastened home in an effort to overhear what he 
might report to my careworn father. Were my sojourns beyond the chained door about to be 
proclaimed to the world? Imagine my delighted astonishment on hearing the spy inform my 
parent in a cautious whisper that I had spent the night in the bower outside the tomb; my 
sleep-filmed eyes fixed upon the crevice where the padlocked portal stood ajar! By what 
miracle had the watcher been thus deluded? I was now convinced that a supernatural agency 
protected me. Made bold by this heaven-sent circumstance, I began to resume perfect 
openness in going to the vault; confident that no one could witness my entrance. For a week I 
tasted to the full the joys of that charnel conviviality which I must not describe, when the thing
happened, and I was borne away to this accursed abode of sorrow and monotony.
I should not have ventured out that night; for the taint of thunder was in the clouds, and a 
hellish phosphorescence rose from the rank swamp at the bottom of the hollow. The call of 
the dead, too, was different. Instead of the hillside tomb, it was the charred cellar on the crest 
of the slope whose presiding daemon beckoned to me with unseen fingers. As I emerged 
from an intervening grove upon the plain before the ruin, I beheld in the misty moonlight a 
thing I had always vaguely expected. The mansion, gone for a century, once more reared its 
stately height to the raptured vision; every window ablaze with the splendour of many 
candles. Up the long drive rolled the coaches of the Boston gentry, whilst on foot came a 
numerous assemblage of powdered exquisites from the neighbouring mansions. With this 
throng I mingled, though I knew I belonged with the hosts rather than with the guests. Inside 
the hall were music, laughter, and wine on every hand. Several faces I recognised; though I 
should have known them better had they been shrivelled or eaten away by death and 
decomposition. Amidst a wild and reckless throng I was the wildest and most abandoned. Gay 
blasphemy poured in torrents from my lips, and in my shocking sallies I heeded no law of 
God, Man, or Nature. Suddenly a peal of thunder, resonant even above the din of the swinish 
revelry, clave the very roof and laid a hush of fear upon the boisterous company. Red tongues 
of flame and searing gusts of heat engulfed the house; and the roysterers, struck with terror at 
the descent of a calamity which seemed to transcend the bounds of unguided Nature, fled 
shrieking into the night. I alone remained, riveted to my seat by a grovelling fear which I had 
never felt before. And then a second horror took possession of my soul. Burnt alive to ashes, 
my body dispersed by the four winds, I might never lie in the tomb of the Hydes! Was not my 
coffin prepared for me? Had I not a right to rest till eternity amongst the descendants of Sir 
Geoffrey Hyde? Aye! I would claim my heritage of death, even though my soul go seeking 
through the ages for another corporeal tenement to represent it on that vacant slab in the 
alcove of the vault. Jervas Hyde should never share the sad fate of Palinurus!
As the phantom of the burning house faded, I found myself screaming and struggling madly in 
the arms of two men, one of whom was the spy who had followed me to the tomb. Rain was 
pouring down in torrents, and upon the southern horizon were flashes of the lightning that had 
so lately passed over our heads. My father, his face lined with sorrow, stood by as I shouted 
my demands to be laid within the tomb; frequently admonishing my captors to treat me as 
gently as they could. A blackened circle on the floor of the ruined cellar told of a violent stroke 
from the heavens; and from this spot a group of curious villagers with lanterns were prying a 
small box of antique workmanship which the thunderbolt had brought to light. Ceasing my 
futile and now objectless writhing, I watched the spectators as they viewed the treasure-trove, 
and was permitted to share in their discoveries. The box, whose fastenings were broken by 
the stroke which had unearthed it, contained many papers and objects of value; but I had 
eyes for one thing alone. It was the porcelain miniature of a young man in a smartly curled 
bag-wig, and bore the initials ―J. H. The face was such that as I gazed, I might well have 
been studying my mirror.
On the following day I was brought to this room with the barred windows, but I have been kept 
informed of certain things through an aged and simple-minded servitor, for whom I bore a 
fondness in infancy, and who like me loves the churchyard. What I have dared relate of my 
experiences within the vault has brought me only pitying smiles. My father, who visits me 
frequently, declares that at no time did I pass the chained portal, and swears that the rusted 
padlock had not been touched for fifty years when he examined it. He even says that all the 
village knew of my journeys to the tomb, and that I was often watched as I slept in the bower 
outside the grim facade, my half-open eyes fixed on the crevice that leads to the interior. 
Against these assertions I have no tangible proof to offer, since my key to the padlock was 
lost in the struggle on that night of horrors. The strange things of the past which I learnt during 
those nocturnal meetings with the dead he dismisses as the fruits of my lifelong and 
omnivorous browsing amongst the ancient volumes of the family library. Had it not been for 
my old servant Hiram, I should have by this time become quite convinced of my madness.
But Hiram, loyal to the last, has held faith in me, and has done that which impels me to make 
public at least a part of my story. A week ago he burst open the lock which chains the door of 
the tomb perpetually ajar, and descended with a lantern into the murky depths. On a slab in 
an alcove he found an old but empty coffin whose tarnished plate bears the single word 
―Jervas. In that coffin and in that vault they have promised me I shall be buried.
Return to Table of Contents
Dagon
(1917)
I am writing this under an appreciable mental strain, since by tonight I shall be no more. 
Penniless, and at the end of my supply of the drug which alone makes life endurable, I can 
bear the torture no longer; and shall cast myself from this garret window into the squalid street 
below. Do not think from my slavery to morphine that I am a weakling or a degenerate. When 
you have read these hastily scrawled pages you may guess, though never fully realise, why it 
is that I must have forgetfulness or death.
It was in one of the most open and least frequented parts of the broad Pacific that the packet 
of which I was supercargo fell a victim to the German sea-raider. The great war was then at its 
very beginning, and the ocean forces of the Hun had not completely sunk to their later 
degradation; so that our vessel was made a legitimate prize, whilst we of her crew were 
treated with all the fairness and consideration due us as naval prisoners. So liberal, indeed, 
was the discipline of our captors, that five days after we were taken I managed to escape 
alone in a small boat with water and provisions for a good length of time.
When I finally found myself adrift and free, I had but little idea of my surroundings. Never a 
competent navigator, I could only guess vaguely by the sun and stars that I was somewhat 
south of the equator. Of the longitude I knew nothing, and no island or coast-line was in sight. 
The weather kept fair, and for uncounted days I drifted aimlessly beneath the scorching sun; 
waiting either for some passing ship, or to be cast on the shores of some habitable land. But 
neither ship nor land appeared, and I began to despair in my solitude upon the heaving 
vastnesses of unbroken blue.
The change happened whilst I slept. Its details I shall never know; for my slumber, though 
troubled and dream-infested, was continuous. When at last I awaked, it was to discover 
myself half sucked into a slimy expanse of hellish black mire which extended about me in 
monotonous undulations as far as I could see, and in which my boat lay grounded some 
distance away.
Though one might well imagine that my first sensation would be of wonder at so prodigious 
and unexpected a transformation of scenery, I was in reality more horrified than astonished; 
for there was in the air and in the rotting soil a sinister quality which chilled me to the very 
core. The region was putrid with the carcasses of decaying fish, and of other less describable 
things which I saw protruding from the nasty mud of the unending plain. Perhaps I should not 
hope to convey in mere words the unutterable hideousness that can dwell in absolute silence 
and barren immensity. There was nothing within hearing, and nothing in sight save a vast 
reach of black slime; yet the very completeness of the stillness and the homogeneity of the 
landscape oppressed me with a nauseating fear.
The sun was blazing down from a sky which seemed to me almost black in its cloudless 
cruelty; as though reflecting the inky marsh beneath my feet. As I crawled into the stranded 
boat I realised that only one theory could explain my position. Through some unprecedented 
volcanic upheaval, a portion of the ocean floor must have been thrown to the surface, 
exposing regions which for innumerable millions of years had lain hidden under unfathomable 
watery depths. So great was the extent of the new land which had risen beneath me, that I 
could not detect the faintest noise of the surging ocean, strain my ears as I might. Nor were 
there any sea-fowl to prey upon the dead things.
For several hours I sat thinking or brooding in the boat, which lay upon its side and afforded a 
slight shade as the sun moved across the heavens. As the day progressed, the ground lost 
some of its stickiness, and seemed likely to dry sufficiently for travelling purposes in a short 
time. That night I slept but little, and the next day I made for myself a pack containing food 
and water, preparatory to an overland journey in search of the vanished sea and possible 
rescue.
On the third morning I found the soil dry enough to walk upon with ease. The odour of the fish 
was maddening; but I was too much concerned with graver things to mind so slight an evil, 
and set out boldly for an unknown goal. All day I forged steadily westward, guided by a far away
hummock which rose higher than any other elevation on the rolling desert. That night I 
encamped, and on the following day still travelled toward the hummock, though that object 
seemed scarcely nearer than when I had first espied it. By the fourth evening I attained the 
base of the mound, which turned out to be much higher than it had appeared from a distance; 
an intervening valley setting it out in sharper relief from the general surface. Too weary to 
ascend, I slept in the shadow of the hill.
I know not why my dreams were so wild that night; but ere the waning and fantastically 
gibbous moon had risen far above the eastern plain, I was awake in a cold perspiration, 
determined to sleep no more. Such visions as I had experienced were too much for me to 
endure again. And in the glow of the moon I saw how unwise I had been to travel by day. 
Without the glare of the parching sun, my journey would have cost me less energy; indeed, I 
now felt quite able to perform the ascent which had deterred me at sunset. Picking up my 
pack, I started for the crest of the eminence.
I have said that the unbroken monotony of the rolling plain was a source of vague horror to 
me; but I think my horror was greater when I gained the summit of the mound and looked 
down the other side into an immeasurable pit or canyon, whose black recesses the moon had 
not yet soared high enough to illumine. I felt myself on the edge of the world; peering over the 
rim into a fathomless chaos of eternal night. Through my terror ran curious reminiscences of 
Paradise Lost, and of Satan‘s hideous climb through the unfashioned realms of darkness.
As the moon climbed higher in the sky, I began to see that the slopes of the valley were not 
quite so perpendicular as I had imagined. Ledges and outcroppings of rock afforded fairly 
easy foot-holds for a descent, whilst after a drop of a few hundred feet, the declivity became 
very gradual. Urged on by an impulse which I cannot definitely analyse, I scrambled with 
difficulty down the rocks and stood on the gentler slope beneath, gazing into the Stygian 
deeps where no light had yet penetrated.
All at once my attention was captured by a vast and singular object on the opposite slope, 
which rose steeply about an hundred yards ahead of me; an object that gleamed whitely in 
the newly bestowed rays of the ascending moon. That it was merely a gigantic piece of stone, 
I soon assured myself; but I was conscious of a distinct impression that its contour and 
position were not altogether the work of Nature. A closer scrutiny filled me with sensations I 
cannot express; for despite its enormous magnitude, and its position in an abyss which had 
yawned at the bottom of the sea since the world was young, I perceived beyond a doubt that 
the strange object was a well-shaped monolith whose massive bulk had known the 
workmanship and perhaps the worship of living and thinking creatures.
Dazed and frightened, yet not without a certain thrill of the scientist‘s or archaeologist‘s 
delight, I examined my surroundings more closely. The moon, now near the zenith, shone 
weirdly and vividly above the towering steeps that hemmed in the chasm, and revealed the 
fact that a far-flung body of water flowed at the bottom, winding out of sight in both directions, 
and almost lapping my feet as I stood on the slope. Across the chasm, the wavelets washed 
the base of the Cyclopean monolith; on whose surface I could now trace both inscriptions and 
crude sculptures. The writing was in a system of hieroglyphics unknown to me, and unlike 
anything I had ever seen in books; consisting for the most part of conventionalised aquatic 
symbols such as fishes, eels, octopi, crustaceans, molluscs, whales, and the like. Several 
characters obviously represented marine things which are unknown to the modern world, but 
whose decomposing forms I had observed on the ocean-risen plain.
It was the pictorial carving, however, that did most to hold me spellbound. Plainly visible 
across the intervening water on account of their enormous size, were an array of bas-reliefs 
whose subjects would have excited the envy of a Doré. I think that these things were 
supposed to depict men—at least, a certain sort of men; though the creatures were shewn 
disporting like fishes in the waters of some marine grotto, or paying homage at some 
monolithic shrine which appeared to be under the waves as well. Of their faces and forms I 
dare not speak in detail; for the mere remembrance makes me grow faint. Grotesque beyond 
the imagination of a Poe or a Bulwer, they were damnably human in general outline despite 
webbed hands and feet, shockingly wide and flabby lips, glassy, bulging eyes, and other 
features less pleasant to recall. Curiously enough, they seemed to have been chiselled badly 
out of proportion with their scenic background; for one of the creatures was shewn in the act 
of killing a whale represented as but little larger than himself. I remarked, as I say, their 
grotesqueness and strange size; but in a moment decided that they were merely the 
imaginary gods of some primitive fishing or seafaring tribe; some tribe whose last descendant 
had perished eras before the first ancestor of the Piltdown or Neanderthal Man was born. 
Awestruck at this unexpected glimpse into a past beyond the conception of the most daring 
anthropologist, I stood musing whilst the moon cast queer reflections on the silent channel 
before me.
Then suddenly I saw it. With only a slight churning to mark its rise to the surface, the thing slid 
into view above the dark waters. Vast, Polyphemus-like, and loathsome, it darted like a 
stupendous monster of nightmares to the monolith, about which it flung its gigantic scaly 
arms, the while it bowed its hideous head and gave vent to certain measured sounds. I think I 
went mad then.
Of my frantic ascent of the slope and cliff, and of my delirious journey back to the stranded 
boat, I remember little. I believe I sang a great deal, and laughed oddly when I was unable to 
sing. I have indistinct recollections of a great storm some time after I reached the boat; at any 
rate, I know that I heard peals of thunder and other tones which Nature utters only in her 
wildest moods.
When I came out of the shadows I was in a San Francisco hospital; brought thither by the 
captain of the American ship which had picked up my boat in mid-ocean. In my delirium I had 
said much, but found that my words had been given scant attention. Of any land upheaval in 
the Pacific, my rescuers knew nothing; nor did I deem it necessary to insist upon a thing 
which I knew they could not believe. Once I sought out a celebrated ethnologist, and amused 
him with peculiar questions regarding the ancient Philistine legend of Dagon, the Fish-God; 
but soon perceiving that he was hopelessly conventional, I did not press my inquiries.
It is at night, especially when the moon is gibbous and waning, that I see the thing. I tried 
morphine; but the drug has given only transient surcease, and has drawn me into its clutches 
as a hopeless slave. So now I am to end it all, having written a full account for the information 
or the contemptuous amusement of my fellow-men. Often I ask myself if it could not all have 
been a pure phantasm - a mere freak of fever as I lay sun-stricken and raving in the open 
boat after my escape from the German man-of-war. This I ask myself, but ever does there 
come before me a hideously vivid vision in reply. I cannot think of the deep sea without 
shuddering at the nameless things that may at this very moment be crawling and floundering 
on its slimy bed, worshipping their ancient stone idols and carving their own detestable 
likenesses on submarine obelisks of water-soaked granite. I dream of a day when they may 
rise above the billows to drag down in their reeking talons the remnants of puny, war
exhausted mankind of a day when the land shall sink, and the dark ocean floor shall ascend 
amidst universal pandemonium.
The end is near. I hear a noise at the door, as of some immense slippery body lumbering 
against it. It shall not find me. God, that hand! The window! The window!

I. The Book

The place was dark and dusty and half-lost
In tangles of old alleys near the quays,
Reeking of strange things brought in from the seas,
And with queer curls of fog that west winds tossed.
Small lozenge panes, obscured by smoke and frost,
Just shewed the books, in piles like twisted trees,
Rotting from floor to roof—congeries
Of crumbling elder lore at little cost.

I entered, charmed, and from a cobwebbed heap
Took up the nearest tome and thumbed it through,
Trembling at curious words that seemed to keep
Some secret, monstrous if one only knew.
Then, looking for some seller old in craft,
I could find nothing but a voice that laughed.


II. Pursuit

I held the book beneath my coat, at pains
To hide the thing from sight in such a place;
Hurrying through the ancient harbor lanes
With often-turning head and nervous pace.
Dull, furtive windows in old tottering brick
Peered at me oddly as I hastened by,
And thinking what they sheltered, I grew sick
For a redeeming glimpse of clean blue sky.

No one had seen me take the thing; but still
A blank laugh echoed in my whirling head,
And I could guess what nighted worlds of ill
Lurked in that volume I had coveted.
The way grew strange—the walls alike and madding—
And far behind me, unseen feet were padding.


III. The Key

I do not know what windings in the waste
Of those strange sea-lanes brought me home once more,
But on my porch I trembled, white with haste
To get inside and bolt the heavy door.
I had the book that told the hidden way
Across the void and through the space-hung screens
That hold the undimensioned worlds at bay,
And keep lost aeons to their own demesnes.

At last the key was mine to those vague visions
Of sunset spires and twilight woods that brood
Dim in the gulfs beyond this earth’s precisions,
Lurking as memories of infinitude.
The key was mine, but as I sat there mumbling,
The attic window shook with a faint fumbling.


IV. Recognition

The day had come again, when as a child
I saw—just once—that hollow of old oaks,
Grey with a ground-mist that enfolds and chokes
The slinking shapes which madness has defiled.
It was the same—an herbage rank and wild
Clings round an altar whose carved sign invokes
That Nameless One to whom a thousand smokes
Rose, aeons gone, from unclean towers up-piled.

I saw the body spread on that dank stone,
And knew those things which feasted were not men;
I knew this strange, grey world was not my own,
But Yuggoth, past the starry voids—and then
The body shrieked at me with a dead cry,
And all too late I knew that it was I!


V. Homecoming

The daemon said that he would take me home
To the pale, shadowy land I half recalled
As a high place of stair and terrace, walled
With marble balustrades that sky-winds comb,
While miles below a maze of dome on dome
And tower on tower beside a sea lies sprawled.
Once more, he told me, I would stand enthralled
On those old heights, and hear the far-off foam.

All this he promised, and through sunset’s gate
He swept me, past the lapping lakes of flame,
And red-gold thrones of gods without a name
Who shriek in fear at some impending fate.
Then a black gulf with sea-sounds in the night:
"Here was your home," he mocked, "when you had sight!"


VI. The Lamp

We found the lamp inside those hollow cliffs
Whose chiseled sign no priest in Thebes could read,
And from whose caverns frightened hieroglyphs
Warned every living creature of earth’s breed.
No more was there—just that one brazen bowl
With traces of a curious oil within;
Fretted with some obscurely patterned scroll,
And symbols hinting vaguely of strange sin.

Little the fears of forty centuries meant
To us as we bore off our slender spoil,
And when we scanned it in our darkened tent
We struck a match to test the ancient oil.
It blazed—great God! . . . But the vast shapes we saw
In that mad flash have seared our lives with awe.


VII. Zaman’s Hill

The great hill hung close over the old town,
A precipice against the main street’s end;
Green, tall, and wooded, looking darkly down
Upon the steeple at the highway bend.
Two hundred years the whispers had been heard
About what happened on the man-shunned slope—
Tales of an oddly mangled deer or bird,
Or of lost boys whose kin had ceased to hope.

One day the mail-man found no village there,
Nor were its folk or houses seen again;
People came out from Aylesbury to stare—
Yet they all told the mail-man it was plain
That he was mad for saying he had spied
The great hill’s gluttonous eyes, and jaws stretched wide.


VIII. The Port

Ten miles from Arkham I had struck the trail
That rides the cliff-edge over Boynton Beach,
And hoped that just at sunset I could reach
The crest that looks on Innsmouth in the vale.
Far out at sea was a retreating sail,
White as hard years of ancient winds could bleach,
But evil with some portent beyond speech,
So that I did not wave my hand or hail.

Sails out of Innsmouth! echoing old renown
Of long-dead times. But now a too-swift night
Is closing in, and I have reached the height
Whence I so often scan the distant town.
The spires and roofs are there—but look! The gloom
Sinks on dark lanes, as lightless as the tomb!


IX. The Courtyard

It was the city I had known before;
The ancient, leprous town where mongrel throngs
Chant to strange gods, and beat unhallowed gongs
In crypts beneath foul alleys near the shore.
The rotting, fish-eyed houses leered at me
From where they leaned, drunk and half-animate,
As edging through the filth I passed the gate
To the black courtyard where the man would be.

The dark walls closed me in, and loud I cursed
That ever I had come to such a den,
When suddenly a score of windows burst
Into wild light, and swarmed with dancing men:
Mad, soundless revels of the dragging dead—
And not a corpse had either hands or head!


X. The Pigeon-Flyers

They took me slumming, where gaunt walls of brick
Bulge outward with a viscous stored-up evil,
And twisted faces, thronging foul and thick,
Wink messages to alien god and devil.
A million fires were blazing in the streets,
And from flat roofs a furtive few would fly
Bedraggled birds into the yawning sky
While hidden drums droned on with measured beats.

I knew those fires were brewing monstrous things,
And that those birds of space had been Outside—
I guessed to what dark planet’s crypts they plied,
And what they brought from Thog beneath their wings.
The others laughed—till struck too mute to speak
By what they glimpsed in one bird’s evil beak.


XI. The Well

Farmer Seth Atwood was past eighty when
He tried to sink that deep well by his door,
With only Eb to help him bore and bore.
We laughed, and hoped he’d soon be sane again.
And yet, instead, young Eb went crazy, too,
So that they shipped him to the county farm.
Seth bricked the well-mouth up as tight as glue—
Then hacked an artery in his gnarled left arm.

After the funeral we felt bound to get
Out to that well and rip the bricks away,
But all we saw were iron hand-holds set
Down a black hole deeper than we could say.
And yet we put the bricks back—for we found
The hole too deep for any line to sound.


XII. The Howler

They told me not to take the Briggs’ Hill path
That used to be the highroad through to Zoar,
For Goody Watkins, hanged in seventeen-four,
Had left a certain monstrous aftermath.
Yet when I disobeyed, and had in view
The vine-hung cottage by the great rock slope,
I could not think of elms or hempen rope,
But wondered why the house still seemed so new.

Stopping a while to watch the fading day,
I heard faint howls, as from a room upstairs,
When through the ivied panes one sunset ray
Struck in, and caught the howler unawares.
I glimpsed—and ran in frenzy from the place,
And from a four-pawed thing with human face.


XIII. Hesperia

The winter sunset, flaming beyond spires
And chimneys half-detached from this dull sphere,
Opens great gates to some forgotten year
Of elder splendours and divine desires.
Expectant wonders burn in those rich fires,
Adventure-fraught, and not untinged with fear;
A row of sphinxes where the way leads clear
Toward walls and turrets quivering to far lyres.

It is the land where beauty’s meaning flowers;
Where every unplaced memory has a source;
Where the great river Time begins its course
Down the vast void in starlit streams of hours.
Dreams bring us close—but ancient lore repeats
That human tread has never soiled these streets.


XIV. Star-Winds

It is a certain hour of twilight glooms,
Mostly in autumn, when the star-wind pours
Down hilltop streets, deserted out-of-doors,
But shewing early lamplight from snug rooms.
The dead leaves rush in strange, fantastic twists,
And chimney-smoke whirls round with alien grace,
Heeding geometries of outer space,
While Fomalhaut peers in through southward mists.

This is the hour when moonstruck poets know
What fungi sprout in Yuggoth, and what scents
And tints of flowers fill Nithon’s continents,
Such as in no poor earthly garden blow.
Yet for each dream these winds to us convey,
A dozen more of ours they sweep away!


XV. Antarktos

Deep in my dream the great bird whispered queerly
Of the black cone amid the polar waste;
Pushing above the ice-sheet lone and drearly,
By storm-crazed aeons battered and defaced.
Hither no living earth-shapes take their courses,
And only pale auroras and faint suns
Glow on that pitted rock, whose primal sources
Are guessed at dimly by the Elder Ones.

If men should glimpse it, they would merely wonder
What tricky mound of Nature’s build they spied;
But the bird told of vaster parts, that under
The mile-deep ice-shroud crouch and brood and bide.
God help the dreamer whose mad visions shew
Those dead eyes set in crystal gulfs below!


XVI. The Window

The house was old, with tangled wings outthrown,
Of which no one could ever half keep track,
And in a small room somewhat near the back
Was an odd window sealed with ancient stone.
There, in a dream-plagued childhood, quite alone
I used to go, where night reigned vague and black;
Parting the cobwebs with a curious lack
Of fear, and with a wonder each time grown.

One later day I brought the masons there
To find what view my dim forbears had shunned,
But as they pierced the stone, a rush of air
Burst from the alien voids that yawned beyond.
They fled—but I peered through and found unrolled
All the wild worlds of which my dreams had told.


XVII. A Memory

There were great steppes, and rocky table-lands
Stretching half-limitless in starlit night,
With alien campfires shedding feeble light
On beasts with tinkling bells, in shaggy bands.
Far to the south the plain sloped low and wide
To a dark zigzag line of wall that lay
Like a huge python of some primal day
Which endless time had chilled and petrified.

I shivered oddly in the cold, thin air,
And wondered where I was and how I came,
When a cloaked form against a campfire’s glare
Rose and approached, and called me by my name.
Staring at that dead face beneath the hood,
I ceased to hope—because I understood.


XVIII. The Gardens of Yin

Beyond that wall, whose ancient masonry
Reached almost to the sky in moss-thick towers,
There would be terraced gardens, rich with flowers,
And flutter of bird and butterfly and bee.
There would be walks, and bridges arching over
Warm lotos-pools reflecting temple eaves,
And cherry-trees with delicate boughs and leaves
Against a pink sky where the herons hover.

All would be there, for had not old dreams flung
Open the gate to that stone-lanterned maze
Where drowsy streams spin out their winding ways,
Trailed by green vines from bending branches hung?
I hurried—but when the wall rose, grim and great,
I found there was no longer any gate.


XIX. The Bells

Year after year I heard that faint, far ringing
Of deep-toned bells on the black midnight wind;
Peals from no steeple I could ever find,
But strange, as if across some great void winging.
I searched my dreams and memories for a clue,
And thought of all the chimes my visions carried;
Of quiet Innsmouth, where the white gulls tarried
Around an ancient spire that once I knew.

Always perplexed I heard those far notes falling,
Till one March night the bleak rain splashing cold
Beckoned me back through gateways of recalling
To elder towers where the mad clappers tolled.
They tolled—but from the sunless tides that pour
Through sunken valleys on the sea’s dead floor.


XX. Night-Gaunts

Out of what crypt they crawl, I cannot tell,
But every night I see the rubbery things,
Black, horned, and slender, with membraneous wings,
And tails that bear the bifid barb of hell.
They come in legions on the north wind’s swell,
With obscene clutch that titillates and stings,
Snatching me off on monstrous voyagings
To grey worlds hidden deep in nightmare’s well.

Over the jagged peaks of Thok they sweep,
Heedless of all the cries I try to make,
And down the nether pits to that foul lake
Where the puffed shoggoths splash in doubtful sleep.
But oh! If only they would make some sound,
Or wear a face where faces should be found!


XXI. Nyarlathotep

And at the last from inner Egypt came
The strange dark One to whom the fellahs bowed;
Silent and lean and cryptically proud,
And wrapped in fabrics red as sunset flame.
Throngs pressed around, frantic for his commands,
But leaving, could not tell what they had heard;
While through the nations spread the awestruck word
That wild beasts followed him and licked his hands.

Soon from the sea a noxious birth began;
Forgotten lands with weedy spires of gold;
The ground was cleft, and mad auroras rolled
Down on the quaking citadels of man.
Then, crushing what he chanced to mould in play,
The idiot Chaos blew Earth’s dust away.


XXII. Azathoth

Out in the mindless void the daemon bore me,
Past the bright clusters of dimensioned space,
Till neither time nor matter stretched before me,
But only Chaos, without form or place.
Here the vast Lord of All in darkness muttered
Things he had dreamed but could not understand,
While near him shapeless bat-things flopped and fluttered
In idiot vortices that ray-streams fanned.

They danced insanely to the high, thin whining
Of a cracked flute clutched in a monstrous paw,
Whence flow the aimless waves whose chance combining
Gives each frail cosmos its eternal law.
"I am His Messenger," the daemon said,
As in contempt he struck his Master’s head.


XXIII. Mirage

I do not know if ever it existed—
That lost world floating dimly on Time’s stream—
And yet I see it often, violet-misted,
And shimmering at the back of some vague dream.
There were strange towers and curious lapping rivers,
Labyrinths of wonder, and low vaults of light,
And bough-crossed skies of flame, like that which quivers
Wistfully just before a winter’s night.

Great moors led off to sedgy shores unpeopled,
Where vast birds wheeled, while on a windswept hill
There was a village, ancient and white-steepled,
With evening chimes for which I listen still.
I do not know what land it is—or dare
Ask when or why I was, or will be, there.


XXIV. The Canal

Somewhere in dream there is an evil place
Where tall, deserted buildings crowd along
A deep, black, narrow channel, reeking strong
Of frightful things whence oily currents race.
Lanes with old walls half meeting overhead
Wind off to streets one may or may not know,
And feeble moonlight sheds a spectral glow
Over long rows of windows, dark and dead.

There are no footfalls, and the one soft sound
Is of the oily water as it glides
Under stone bridges, and along the sides
Of its deep flume, to some vague ocean bound.
None lives to tell when that stream washed away
Its dream-lost region from the world of clay.


XXV. St. Toad’s

"Beware St. Toad’s cracked chimes!" I heard him scream
As I plunged into those mad lanes that wind
In labyrinths obscure and undefined
South of the river where old centuries dream.
He was a furtive figure, bent and ragged,
And in a flash had staggered out of sight,
So still I burrowed onward in the night
Toward where more roof-lines rose, malign and jagged.

No guide-book told of what was lurking here—
But now I heard another old man shriek:
"Beware St. Toad’s cracked chimes!" And growing weak,
I paused, when a third greybeard croaked in fear:
"Beware St. Toad’s cracked chimes!" Aghast, I fled—
Till suddenly that black spire loomed ahead.


XXVI. The Familiars

John Whateley lived about a mile from town,
Up where the hills began to huddle thick;
We never thought his wits were very quick,
Seeing the way he let his farm run down.
He used to waste his time on some queer books
He’d found around the attic of his place,
Till funny lines got creased into his face,
And folks all said they didn’t like his looks.

When he began those night-howls we declared
He’d better be locked up away from harm,
So three men from the Aylesbury town farm
Went for him—but came back alone and scared.
They’d found him talking to two crouching things
That at their step flew off on great black wings.


XXVII. The Elder Pharos

From Leng, where rocky peaks climb bleak and bare
Under cold stars obscure to human sight,
There shoots at dusk a single beam of light
Whose far blue rays make shepherds whine in prayer.
They say (though none has been there) that it comes
Out of a pharos in a tower of stone,
Where the last Elder One lives on alone,
Talking to Chaos with the beat of drums.

The Thing, they whisper, wears a silken mask
Of yellow, whose queer folds appear to hide
A face not of this earth, though none dares ask
Just what those features are, which bulge inside.
Many, in man’s first youth, sought out that glow,
But what they found, no one will ever know.


XXVIII. Expectancy

I cannot tell why some things hold for me
A sense of unplumbed marvels to befall,
Or of a rift in the horizon’s wall
Opening to worlds where only gods can be.
There is a breathless, vague expectancy,
As of vast ancient pomps I half recall,
Or wild adventures, uncorporeal,
Ecstasy-fraught, and as a day-dream free.

It is in sunsets and strange city spires,
Old villages and woods and misty downs,
South winds, the sea, low hills, and lighted towns,
Old gardens, half-heard songs, and the moon’s fires.
But though its lure alone makes life worth living,
None gains or guesses what it hints at giving.


XXIX. Nostalgia

Once every year, in autumn’s wistful glow,
The birds fly out over an ocean waste,
Calling and chattering in a joyous haste
To reach some land their inner memories know.
Great terraced gardens where bright blossoms blow,
And lines of mangoes luscious to the taste,
And temple-groves with branches interlaced
Over cool paths—all these their vague dreams shew.

They search the sea for marks of their old shore—
For the tall city, white and turreted—
But only empty waters stretch ahead,
So that at last they turn away once more.
Yet sunken deep where alien polyps throng,
The old towers miss their lost, remembered song.


XXX. Background

I never can be tied to raw, new things,
For I first saw the light in an old town,
Where from my window huddled roofs sloped down
To a quaint harbour rich with visionings.
Streets with carved doorways where the sunset beams
Flooded old fanlights and small window-panes,
And Georgian steeples topped with gilded vanes—
These were the sights that shaped my childhood dreams.

Such treasures, left from times of cautious leaven,
Cannot but loose the hold of flimsier wraiths
That flit with shifting ways and muddled faiths
Across the changeless walls of earth and heaven.
They cut the moment’s thongs and leave me free
To stand alone before eternity.


XXXI. The Dweller

It had been old when Babylon was new;
None knows how long it slept beneath that mound,
Where in the end our questing shovels found
Its granite blocks and brought it back to view.
There were vast pavements and foundation-walls,
And crumbling slabs and statues, carved to shew
Fantastic beings of some long ago
Past anything the world of man recalls.

And then we saw those stone steps leading down
Through a choked gate of graven dolomite
To some black haven of eternal night
Where elder signs and primal secrets frown.
We cleared a path—but raced in mad retreat
When from below we heard those clumping feet.


XXXII. Alienation

His solid flesh had never been away,
For each dawn found him in his usual place,
But every night his spirit loved to race
Through gulfs and worlds remote from common day.
He had seen Yaddith, yet retained his mind,
And come back safely from the Ghooric zone,
When one still night across curved space was thrown
That beckoning piping from the voids behind.

He waked that morning as an older man,
And nothing since has looked the same to him.
Objects around float nebulous and dim—
False, phantom trifles of some vaster plan.
His folk and friends are now an alien throng
To which he struggles vainly to belong.


XXXIII. Harbour Whistles

Over old roofs and past decaying spires
The harbour whistles chant all through the night;
Throats from strange ports, and beaches far and white,
And fabulous oceans, ranged in motley choirs.
Each to the other alien and unknown,
Yet all, by some obscurely focussed force
From brooding gulfs beyond the Zodiac’s course,
Fused into one mysterious cosmic drone.

Through shadowy dreams they send a marching line
Of still more shadowy shapes and hints and views;
Echoes from outer voids, and subtle clues
To things which they themselves cannot define.
And always in that chorus, faintly blent,
We catch some notes no earth-ship ever sent.


XXXIV. Recapture

The way led down a dark, half-wooded heath
Where moss-grey boulders humped above the mould,
And curious drops, disquieting and cold,
Sprayed up from unseen streams in gulfs beneath.
There was no wind, nor any trace of sound
In puzzling shrub, or alien-featured tree,
Nor any view before—till suddenly,
Straight in my path, I saw a monstrous mound.

Half to the sky those steep sides loomed upspread,
Rank-grassed, and cluttered by a crumbling flight
Of lava stairs that scaled the fear-topped height
In steps too vast for any human tread.
I shrieked—and knew what primal star and year
Had sucked me back from man’s dream-transient sphere!


XXXV. Evening Star

I saw it from that hidden, silent place
Where the old wood half shuts the meadow in.
It shone through all the sunset’s glories—thin
At first, but with a slowly brightening face.
Night came, and that lone beacon, amber-hued,
Beat on my sight as never it did of old;
The evening star—but grown a thousandfold
More haunting in this hush and solitude.

It traced strange pictures on the quivering air—
Half-memories that had always filled my eyes—
Vast towers and gardens; curious seas and skies
Of some dim life—I never could tell where.
But now I knew that through the cosmic dome
Those rays were calling from my far, lost home.


XXXVI. Continuity

There is in certain ancient things a trace
Of some dim essence—more than form or weight;
A tenuous aether, indeterminate,
Yet linked with all the laws of time and space.
A faint, veiled sign of continuities
That outward eyes can never quite descry;
Of locked dimensions harbouring years gone by,
And out of reach except for hidden keys.

It moves me most when slanting sunbeams glow
On old farm buildings set against a hill,
And paint with life the shapes which linger still
From centuries less a dream than this we know.
In that strange light I feel I am not far
From the fixt mass whose sides the ages are.
